---
date: "2025-6-1"
tags: 
    - philosophy
    - conceptual
published: true
---

At the beginning of this semester, my Computational Biology teacher posed a big question to us: What is life?[^1] Throughout my time in this class, biology, and in my everyday life, I have constantly been pondering this question. My current hypothesis is that life is easily explainable, understandable, and logical. However, one thing about life still eludes me: consciousness. The idea of consciousness has been discussed at length all the way back in the time of ancient philosophers like Plato and Aristotle. In this essay, I will describe different interpretations of consciousness, my understanding of consciousness from both an evolutionary and philosophical standpoint, as well as my thoughts and aspirations for it.

Firstly, consciousness is not an idea that only has one definition. In terms of semantics, it means understanding, awareness, and having knowledge. In terms of functionality, it can be a basic ability to perceive the world, remember the world, and react to it, often classified as lower consciousness, or the ability to understand abstract ideas like language, self, and feelings, often classified as higher consciousness. Note that these interpretations are used in fields that only care about the functional value of consciousness, or, in other words, the outside observable attributes of a conscious being. For the sake of avoiding confusion, I will call this “functional consciousness” which I intend to be synonymous with behaviorism. There is another interpretation that involves a philosophical idea that is much less quantifiable: qualia. Qualia is the subjective sensation that a conscious being experiences. I like to think of it as the intricate gaming interface that your many senses and muscles create for you; as if you were a player in an expansive digital world. In this way, you sense things very differently from what can be quantified and observed from the outside. When a tiger leaps towards you, many signals are sent to your brain. However, instead of feeling that signal or feeling many neurons firing in your brain, you *see* the tiger in a very intuitive and direct way. This I will call “sensory consciousness”, also for the sake of avoiding confusion.

Just like many other parts of life, functional consciousness can be explained plainly through the analysis of biological systems and their evolutionary processes. Through natural selection, different self-sustaining organisms change in ways that are reproductively favorable.[^2] Throughout this process, many beneficial traits are selected for, such as wings, eyes, tails, arms, and most importantly, brains.[^3] I’m not an expert on this, so I won’t pretend to be, but I’m pretty sure that the majority of successful large scale organisms today have brains (even the dinosaurs!). This follows the same logic: brains are prominent because they helped organisms outcompete competition and reproduce successfully. While brains are not synonymous with functional consciousness, it can be observed that species with brains need their brains for their functional consciousness.

In stark contrast, sensory consciousness is basically impossible to analyze quantitatively. This is because of the way qualia is defined: the subjective experience. Termed “the hard problem”, it is a mostly abstract and unapproachable concept that is discussed mainly in philosophy and separate from other experimental sciences. Thought experiments like the philosophical zombie or china brain exemplifies this gap by constructing scenarios where a being exhibits intelligent behavior such as normal human actions or computational complexity, but does not experience a consciousness corresponding to its being. Many different attempts have been made to make sense of this phenomenon, but they have all failed to provide a uniform, generalizable, and unassuming theory. Current day theories rely on making bold assumptions about aspects of consciousness to make hypotheses. 

While it is difficult, the problem of sensory consciousness is surprisingly interesting to me because it is so elusive. Functional consciousness is explainable and logical, but sensory consciousness is just mysterious. Having modeled the parts of the brain in Ted’s class and conducted research for this essay, I have seen the value of brain models as well as personally felt many of the frustrations that people across time and space have run into trying to study this phenomenon.[^4] For example, in the neuroscience module, we studied aspects of the Integrated Information Theory[^5] in relation to consciousness. I liked this approach because it relates to functional consciousness in its connection to computational complexity, which is observed through behaviors of the system. It essentially postulates that when a system is complex enough—showing attributes like integration, differentiation, and reentry—it will be conscious, and to measure this, we analyze its behavior, such as its intellectual abilities, reaction to certain stimulation, or information representation capabilities. In no way is it a general theory of consciousness, but it is interesting because it connects these two ideas of consciousness like a bridge.

Furthermore, this problem is intimate to every single human being on earth.[^6] We experience qualia everyday, and are taught that it is constructed purely from our sensory organs. The first time I was introduced to this idea, I was baffled. I mean, it sounds completely insane that the ultra-sensory VR video game we call life is actually just created by some electrical signals in our flesh.[^7] Where are all the wires and display screens? 

Through this class, I have gained a deep insight into the theories that humans have developed to analyze different types of consciousness, the final missing piece in the puzzle of life. The importance of this puzzle piece cannot be understated. Anything that helps us humans understand ourselves at a deep level poses immense value because of the multitude of ways we could use it to better our lives and potentially advance other fields. This problem is also deeply connected with many other equally intriguing big questions. What happens after we die?[^8] Are we in a simulation? How real is reality? Do we have free will? Can we create conscious beings? Nevertheless, this journey of exploration has been very rewarding for me, and I will continue to ponder questions posed in this essay and follow research in consciousness with eager eyes in the future.  


[^1]:  We initially were introduced to this question by reading Erwin Schrödinger’s book *What is Life?*.

[^2]:  There is the potential exception of viruses, but they won’t be important in this narrative. 

[^3]:  While brains are not unique in their intelligence providing services, they are the most prominent in today’s world both in humans and not, which is what I care about.

[^4]:  [https://github.com/Moonflower2022/nk-models](https://github.com/Moonflower2022/nk-models)

[^5]:  Someone wrote a very long and in-depth paper about using this theory to analyze the consciousness of AI that I read. It was very intriguing and inspired me to write about this idea in my essay.

[^6]:  Assuming that every human being is conscious, of course.

[^7]:  This is definitely an understatement for the complexity of the brain and the human body, but you get the point.

[^8]:  I spent many hours of my childhood pondering this one. *Will it go into blackness? There wouldn’t even be blackness because I wouldn’t be experiencing it. How would I experience the experience of not experiencing? Will I wake up in a world completely different from ours, having just played the game of life?*